---
layout: page
title: 7)
permalink: /Roadmap/EmergentQuantum/
---


# Emergent Quantum Advantage In Learning Physical Systems

Recent advancements in quantum technologies have opened new horizons for exploring the physical world in ways once deemed impossible. Central to these breakthroughs is the concept of quantum advantage, where quantum systems outperform their classical counterparts in solving specific tasks. While much attention in quantum technologies has been devoted to computational speedups, ie ***just*** an *advanced computer* ... or what breaks *or saves* cryptography ... you probably have read articles such as [*Cryptographers Discover a New Foundation for Quantum Secrecy*](https://www.quantamagazine.org/cryptographers-discover-a-new-foundation-for-quantum-secrecy-20240603/) which discuss how researchers have proved that secure quantum encryption is possible in a world where almost infinite levels of compute are available and cheap and thus, there are no sufficiently difficult or NP-hard problems to secure the *blockchain data*, eg Bitcoin security primarily currently relies on the cryptographic hash function SHA-256, which is considered computationally expensive to reverse, making it difficult for most people to manipulate the blockchain data. 

However, **there's a LOT more to the quantum world than just computing** ... for example the quantum advantage in learning physical systems remains a largely untapped frontier.

Learning the properties of a physical system by performing measurements on it is at the foundation of natural sciences. The learning task [in really delving down to most fundamental fundamentals, in quantum systems] is hindered by the constraints of quantum physics, such as the inherent quantum noise associated with measurements, encapsulated by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. Consequently, the sample complexity—the number of experiments required to learn certain properties of quantum systems—can scale exponentially with the system size, rendering some learning tasks practically infeasible using classical, conventional learning approaches.

In conventional settings, this typically involves collecting a large set, ie we tend think of *sampling different slices or cross-sections*, of independent measurements of certain variables of the system and applying statistical methods on a classical computer to estimate their underlying distribution, from which the properties of the system can be inferred. [Tomography](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomography#Types_of_tomography), not to be confused with topography, is imaging by sections or sectioning that uses any kind of penetrating wave to generate sectional ‘anatomical’ information at a precise planar position within an object. The term is derived from the Greek word “tomos” meaning “slice” and “graphe” meaning “drawing”. Historically, the ‘penetrating wave’ has been X-rays and as such the term tomography has sort of lost its Greek "tomos" or *cross-sectioning* origins and has instead become synonymous with X-ray-based imaging and *magic* of radiation. Nonetheless, the production of these images has been based on slice-and-then-reconstruct algorithms or mathematical procedures known as [tomographic reconstruction](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reconstruction_algorithm), such as X-ray computed tomography technically being produced from multiple projectional radiographs. Many different reconstruction algorithms exist; most algorithms fall into one of two categories: [filtered back projection (FBP)](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filtered_back_projection) and [iterative reconstruction (IR)](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iterative_reconstruction). 

As an alternative to the conventional approach of using independent probe states and a classical processor for data analysis, quantum learning strategies have been proposed in which the probe states are not measured independently but instead undergo a collective quantum algorithmic measurement **before** data analysis is conducted. By leveraging quantum coherence of the probe states and collective measurements, it has been shown that, for certain finite-dimensional quantum systems, the sample complexity required to learn some of their underlying properties can be dramatically reduced, with an exponentially smaller number of experiments required to complete the task. For example, this quantum advantage in learning was perhaps first demonstrated on a superconducting electronic platform ... utilizing 20 qubits as a probe state, a learning task was accomplished using approximately 100,000 fewer samples than conventional methods. Thus, it is particularly intriguing to address how a scalable quantum learning advantage can be achieved in other practical scenarios. 

It is worth stopping a moment to pondering significance this radical reduction in sample size further and repeat the earlier statement *to ourselves*, **"There's a LOT more to the quantum world than just computing."** Computing is not really an end in itself, except for compute nerds or AI nerds; after all, what do ***NORMAL*** humans use computers for? For those of us who are interested in learning about physical systems [to extend human capabilities to do all kinds of things], it's exciting to contemplate how the emergent quantum advantage in learning about or exploring physical systems remains a largely untapped frontier.